# Summary

This is the Cadhan Aonair UD treebank, consisting of 
150 sentences randomly sampled from six pre-standard Irish texts. In January 2023, the treebank was augmented with a late Classical Modern Irish (bardic) poem, described in a [separate section below](https://github.com/UniversalDependencies/UD_Irish-Cadhan#bardic-segment).

# Bardic segment

The Cadhan treebank includes a late Classical Modern Irish (bardic) poem entitled <em>Mo mhallacht ort, a shaoghail</em> (“My curse on you, world”, c. 1655), consisting of 43 sentences (stanzas). The text was converted to a UD treebank by Dr Theodorus Fransen as part of a [CLS INFRA](https://clsinfra.io/) TNA fellowship at ÚFAL, Charles University, Prague (CZ), between September and December 2022. The version of the poem contained in the treebank is based on a lightly edited transcription available at https://bardic.celt.dias.ie/displayPoem.php?firstLineID=1387. A recent edition and translation of the poem (Mac Cárthaigh 2013) proved indispensable for proper morphological and syntactic analysis. For information about invaluable preparatory work on indexing and transcribing a large part of the extant Bardic corpus, as well as recent (non-UD) tagging and lemmatisation methods, see https://www.tcd.ie/Irish/research/bardic.php.

## Tokenisation and annotation

Tokenisation and annotation decisions are based on Scannell (2022, pp. 9–10). It is worth pointing out that it is common in Bardic poetry — or in the transcribed texts at least — for two words to be written together, the first appearing as a clitic (e.g. _'sgan_ for _is_ (_agus_) _gan_); such cases are treated as multiword tokens. Lemmata are generally modern dictionary headwords based on [Ó Dónaill (1977)](https://www.teanglann.ie/en/fgb/). For pre-standard variants in our treebank for which a separate dictionary entry exists in Ó Dónaill (1977), the cross-referenced, standard headword has been used. This leads to a gender “mismatch” with _ccóigidh_ “(of the) fifths (i.e. provinces)” (`bardic_1387-26`), which has been mapped to the standard masculine lemma _cúige_ in our treebank, despite the existence of a modern feminine variant _cúigidh_. Two tokens do not have a corresponding modern lemma; _ima_ in _ima seach_ “in turn” (`bardic_1387-9`) is obsolete and has been lemmatised as _faoi_ according to modern usage, while _denas_ “(for a) while” (`bardic_1387-34`), which has no modern equivalent, is accompanied by the lemma _denus_, based on [dil.ie/15475](https://dil.ie/15475) (originally neuter but tagged as a masculine noun in our treebank).

While the language is for the most part Classical Modern Irish (c. 1200–1650), post-classical developments can clearly be seen, notably the simplification of the case system and conflation of case forms and constructions governed by prepositions (Mac Cárthaigh 2013, p. 47–48). For example, the accusative is used instead of the dative in _san saoghal_ “in this life” (`bardic_1387-39`; expected _san tshaoghal_), and acc./dat.sg _airdrígh_ “high-king” is used in subject position in `bardic_1387-3` (with the expected nom.sg _rí_ appearing in `bardic_1387-2`). Due to this “confusion”, and since the anchor point for tagging and parsing is contemporary standard Irish, it was decided not to use the accusative feature, which is not part of the contemporary language and is therefore not used in the modern Irish treebank. The dative case has only been assigned in cases where the noun has a distinctive dative form and is not also used instead of a nom.sg elsewhere in our poem. Likewise, an originally oblique case form which Ó Dónaill (1977) indexed as a variant, i.e. constituting a separate dictionary entry, has been tagged as a nom.sg. This means, for instance, that _caroid_ (_caraid_) is tagged as a nom.sg in _ó gach caroid_ “from every friend” (`bardic_1387-17`). Echoing observations made in Scannell (2022, p. 9), some of these annotation choices might need to be re-evaluated with the potential future addition of older bardic material, or Early Modern Irish texts more generally, in consultation with other Irish treebank maintainers. In the meantime, any feedback from language specialists is greatly welcomed. 

# Acknowledgments

* Thanks to Teresa Lynn for her many years of work on the Irish treebank,
without which none of this research would be possible.
* Thanks to my undergraduate students Sai Shreyas Bhavanasi and Jianjun Zhang at Saint Louis University for many discussions that helped me understand the mathematics behind cross-lingual word embeddings more deeply.
* This project arose out of conversations with Charlie Dillon at the
Royal Irish Academy in early 2020 just before the COVID pandemic;
my thanks to Charlie and the RIA for hosting me during that visit,
and for inspiring this line of research.
* Dr Theodorus Fransen would like to acknowledge the CLS INFRA scheme (EU Horizon 2020 grant agreement No 101004984) and the invaluable help and advice received from his mentor Dr [Silvie Cinková](https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/silvie-cinkova) during his fellowship at ÚFAL, Charles University, Prague. He is grateful to Prof. Kevin Scannell for generating a first version of the treebank using his projecting parser (Scannell, 2022) in addition to providing general assistance. Dr Eoin Mac Cárthaigh and Dr Elaine Uí Dhonnchadha, both of Trinity College Dublin, provided helpful feedback and generously shared manually checked corpus files annotated with PAROLE tags.

## References

* Mac Cárthaigh, Eoin (2013) [_Mo mhallacht ort, a shaoghail (c. 1655): dán is a sheachadadh_](https://www.jstor.org/stable/42910163), Ériu 63 (2013): 41–77.
* Scannell, Kevin P. (2014) [_Statistical models for text normalization and machine translation_](https://cs.slu.edu/~scannell/pub/coling14.pdf), Proceedings of the 1st Celtic Language Technology Workshop at COLING 2014, Baile Átha Cliath, 23 August 2014.
* Scannell, Kevin P. (2022) [_Diachronic Parsing of Pre-Standard Irish_](https://cs.slu.edu/~scannell/pub/dppsi.pdf), Proceedings of the 4th Celtic Language Technology Workshop (CLTW 2022) at LREC 2022, Marseille, France, 20 June 2022.